Marco Longhi: What assessment he has made of the role of the Union in response to the covid 19 outbreak. 

Mark Logan: What assessment he has made of the role of the Union in response to the covid 19 outbreak. 

Brandon Lewis: . We are working, and will continue to work, closely with all the devolved Administrations, who are  fully committed to suppressing the virus across the UK. Our response to covid 19 is a collective national effort. The Executive are following a science led path, doing what is best for the people of Northern Ireland, recognising the overall approach that we are taking across the UK to fight this pandemic.

Marco Longhi: Does my right hon. Friend agree with most people in Dudley and with me that we are stronger as one United Kingdom in responding to coronavirus? Will he let the House know whether the devolved Administration has improved outcomes for people in ways that we can share across the United Kingdom?

Brandon Lewis: My hon. Friend makes a good point. The short answer is, yes. This is a good example of how the United Kingdom has been stronger than any single part of it, so we are stronger together as a family. As I have said, we will continue to work closely with all the devolved Administrations. I remain in close contact with both the First and Deputy First Ministers of Northern Ireland to co ordinate the response and share information and insights. That approach has been effective, allowing us to work together on issues of common concern, including the provision of personal protective equipment, while allowing plans to be tailored to ensure that they address the particular local situations that we all face.

Mark Logan: Does the Secretary of State agree that whether in Bolton or Belfast our two time tested institutions—the Union and the NHS—have exuded extraordinary heroism in the covid cataclysm that has swept the planet?

Brandon Lewis: Yes, and my hon. Friend’s language is spot on. We have all seen how the NHS has responded with heroism and agility. I thank all key workers across the United Kingdom for their professionalism and dedication to looking after people. We have seen fantastic co operation between all political parties in Northern Ireland and across the UK, and the devolved Governments have worked together in a way that is good for all parts of the United Kingdom as we tackle this crisis.

