Thangam Debbonaire: On a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker. I have given Mr Speaker’s office notice of my intention to raise this matter. Yesterday, during Prime Minister’s questions, the Prime Minister not once but twice made an assertion that was not only inaccurate—she might have been misinformed—but really damaging. She twice asserted that Labour peers were attempting to stop the legislation needed for the net zero carbon emissions target. That is categorically not the case. The noble Lord Grantchester had tabled a motion of regret as an amendment to the statutory instrument, and his intention was not to block it, but to improve it along the lines that I was asking the Prime Minister about. I was attempting to make a clear stand so that the members of the public outside yesterday could hear some sort of cross party consensus, which is what I had been hoping for. I was disappointed that what the Prime Minister said was not just an attempt to make political capital; it was also not the case.I do not wish to imply that the Prime Minister deliberately chose to mislead the House—I am sure that is not the case—but she has now had adequate opportunity to correct the record, and I understand that has not happened. I therefore seek your guidance, Madam Deputy Speaker, on what I can do to ensure that the record is corrected, and not only in a timely manner, but with as much publicity as Prime Minister’s questions allows.

Rosie Winterton: I am grateful to the hon. Lady for giving notice of her intention to raise this matter and, as I understand it, also informing the Prime Minister’s office. She will know that I am not responsible for the accuracy or otherwise of answer given by Ministers at the Dispatch Box. She asks me how she might achieve a correction of the record. She has given her account of the matter and drawn the House’s attention to exchanges in the House of Lords yesterday, which may be relevant. If she wishes to pursue the matter directly with the Prime Minister, she can consider tabling further such questions—the Table Office will be happy to advise her on that. In the meantime, those on the Treasury Bench will have heard her comments, and she has obviously put her point on the record.

