John McNally: What additional financial support he plans to provide to food producers to mitigate the effect of the covid 19 outbreak. 

Tommy Sheppard: What additional financial support he plans to provide to food producers to mitigate the effect of the covid 19 outbreak. 

George Eustice: We are working closely with the agriculture and fishing industries to manage the negative impacts of covid 19. In addition to HM Treasury’s financial support packages, the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has announced support schemes for the dairy and fishing industries, and we continue to monitor other sectors.

John McNally: Will DEFRA Ministers go further and insist with their counterparts in the Department for International Trade on high standards for animal welfare, phytosanitary and food production imports to protect our domestic food producers?

George Eustice: The Government are very clear—and it was set out in our manifesto—that we will not compromise on our high food and animal welfare standards  as we approach trade agreements. Specifically, that means that the UK will determine its own domestic standards when it comes to the so called SPS chapter—those sanitary and phytosanitary issues—relating in particular to food safety. Those will be set at a UK level and we will not abandon or change those standards in response to demands from other countries.

Tommy Sheppard: I note that today’s announcement by the Department for International Trade does not change agricultural tariffs, so how will DEFRA Ministers ensure that the new tariff regimes after Brexit continue to favour our long established and profitable trade in that sector with member states of the European Union? How will they ensure that the tariffs prevent our marketplace from being flooded with low quality products from elsewhere in the world?

George Eustice: The new UK global tariff that has been announced today does retain tariffs for most key agricultural products, including those sensitive agricultural products that are often discussed in this House. The answer to the hon. Gentleman’s question is that we would seek to grant tariff free access to EU trading partners in future through a free trade agreement, and we have set out clearly the legal text of an acceptable free trade agreement should our partners wish to enter into such an agreement. Maintaining those agricultural tariffs also ensures that we do not expose our market in the short term to lower standard products from other countries.

