Jessica Morden: What steps he is taking to encourage greater use of public transport. 

Chris Grayling: Local bus journeys remain central to transport choices, accounting for around 59% of all public transport journeys. The Bus Services Act 2017, introduced by this Government, gives local authorities tools to improve local bus services and increase passenger numbers. The Government spend around £2 billion a year supporting passenger road transport. We are also investing record levels in the UK rail network as part of the biggest modernisation programme for many decades.

Jessica Morden: I know from constituents who commute that far more needs to be done to improve capacity and make traveling by rail more affordable, to encourage people out of their cars. What will Ministers do to address the fact that Wales is set to get only 6% of planned UK rail spending, despite Welsh routes making up 11% of the network? As part of that, can we have a new railway station for Magor as part of the new stations fund?

Chris Grayling: On that latter point, I am aware of the interest of the hon. Lady’s constituents, and it is something we will look at very carefully. I hope she welcomes the Government’s substantial investment in improved rolling stock, improved capacity and improved speed on the Great Western main line, which will benefit her constituency and the whole economy of south Wales.The hon. Lady also talks about transport investment. It is surprising that, in the past few days, the Labour Administration in Wales have backed away from a major upgrade to the M4, which, of course, is the most significant artery for south Wales and its economy.

Tracey Crouch: Given yesterday’s announcement on legislating for net zero greenhouse gases, what steps is my right hon. Friend taking to decarbonise public transport?

Chris Grayling: We are taking a variety of different measures. In this country, we will shortly be seeing the first battery hybrid trains and the first hydrogen powered trains, and we are providing support for low emission and ultra low emission buses. Indeed, I recently went to the constituency of the Under Secretary of State for Transport, my hon. Friend the Member for Harrogate and Knaresborough (Andrew Jones) to see the work that the local bus company is doing to introduce entirely electric powered local bus routes. There is a huge amount happening, but of course, there is a lot more to do to decarbonise the whole public transport sector and our road transport, too.

Jim Shannon: Has the Secretary of State had any discussions with the Treasury regarding a public transport voucher scheme that can be taken from pre tax wages to encourage people to use public transport and thereby lower carbon emissions in our cities?

Chris Grayling: I have not, but I would be happy to discuss the hon. Gentleman’s concept. I am very interested in what he says.

Andy McDonald: Bus services are in crisis. Since 2010, over 3,000 routes have been cut, fares have risen twice as fast as wages and bus use is in freefall. Last month, the cross party Select Committee on Transport published a report on bus services in England outside London that recommended how to end this crisis, including allowing all local authorities to regulate or own their local bus services, providing concessions to young people and boosting funding. The report was led by the evidence. Will the Secretary of State listen to that evidence, accept the recommendations and make them Government policy?

Chris Grayling: Of course we will be responding to the report shortly, but if the hon. Gentleman looks across the country, he will see that the place where bus mileage has been falling fastest is in Labour controlled Wales. Actually, there has been a small increase in the number of routes during my time as Secretary of State. The Government are committed to supporting new, innovative ways to expand bus utilisation, which is why we support the demand responsive services that are emerging across the country and are committed to ensuring that we provide the best possible choice for passengers.The hon. Gentleman referred to the powers under the 2017 Act, and in my time as Secretary of State, I have not received a single proposal or request to introduce bus franchising under that Act. Notwithstanding that fact, I would be happy to do so if I saw evidence that it would improve passenger services.

