Luke Pollard: What discussions he has had with Cabinet colleagues on (a) ensuring resilience and (b) taking emergency steps in the event that the UK leaves the EU without a deal.

James Cleverly: The Government’s priority remains to ensure that a deal is brought before and agreed by Parliament, allowing the UK to leave the EU before 31 October. In the run up to 12 April, various Departments were preparing civil contingency plans, which were regularly discussed with colleagues, with co ordination from the Cabinet Office.

Luke Pollard: Devon and Cornwall’s deputy chief constable, Paul Netherton, is the national lead for civil contingencies. When asked by Plymouth Live, “What’s the worst case scenario for Brexit?”, he replied, without a moment’s hesitation, “No deal”. What conversations is the Department having with the Tory leadership contenders so that both of them truly understand the gut wrenching and dangerous implications of leaving without a deal on 31 October?

James Cleverly: The position that the Government have taken mirrors, without necessarily using the same language, the prioritisation of the hon. Gentleman’s  deputy chief constable. It is that of the two Brexit scenarios available—leaving with an agreement, or leaving without an agreement—the Government’s preferred option of the two is leaving with an agreement. That still can be done if Opposition Members vote to do so. As a sensible and pragmatic Government, we are making sure we prepare for a no deal Brexit, but we have said a number of times from the Government Front Bench that our preferred Brexit option is to leave with an agreement and for this House to vote to do so.

Philip Hollobone: Across the Government, but especially in the Treasury and the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, there is a big drive to improve the nation’s productivity. In the run up to a potential no deal on 31 October, are there not projects that would improve the nation’s productivity, but also enhance our nation’s resilience to a no deal, especially with regard to transport infrastructure around ports, and better prepare us for a no deal situation?

James Cleverly: My hon. Friend makes a very good point. The Government are looking at and planning a number of activities that will benefit the United Kingdom, irrespective of the nature of our departure. As we progress those plans, I am more than happy to share them with him.

Jim Shannon: What recent discussions has the Minister had with the Irish Government regarding co operation and security on the Irish border were we to leave the EU on WTO terms? Will he reassure the House that there will be no stop to the freedom of movement of people and goods across the Irish border?

James Cleverly: The Government have regular meetings with international partners. Indeed, my colleague, Mr Walker—[Interruption.] I apologise, Mr Speaker, I mean my hon. Friend the Member for Worcester (Mr Walker). He will be joining others at the British Irish Council to discuss those issues, and ensure that the concerns highlighted by the hon. Gentleman are addressed.

