Jacob Young: What progress her Department has made on tackling climate change. 

Harriett Baldwin: What progress her Department has made on tackling climate change. 

Kwasi Kwarteng: I welcome and congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Redcar (Jacob Young) on winning his seat—a great result. We have reduced carbon emissions by more than 40% since 1990, while growing our economy by more than two thirds. We are currently decarbonising our economy faster than any other G20 country, and more than half our electricity now comes from low carbon sources. We have the largest offshore wind capacity in the world.

Jacob Young: Net Zero Teesside is potentially a world leading carbon capture, utilisation and storage project in my constituency. Not only will it reduce emissions,   but it will cut energy costs and help to secure our long term industrial future. Will the Minister back Redcar’s industry and fully support that project?

Kwasi Kwarteng: Absolutely—I would be delighted to back Redcar’s big opportunities in CCUS. I was there last week when I had an instructive meeting with various stakeholders and industry professionals, and there is a huge economic opportunity.

Harriett Baldwin: Businesses such as Frank Matthews tree nursery in my constituency play a vital role in growing the trees that we will need to combat climate change. How will the Department ensure that the trees we plant are native, sustainable species?

Kwasi Kwarteng: As my hon. Friend knows, the Government are absolutely behind such initiatives. We have a well developed forest nursery sector, and we encourage the planting of UK grown trees, as proven by our £640 million Nature4Climate fund. That builds on our support for preserving areas of great natural beauty, such as the Malvern hills in my hon. Friend’s constituency, and we hope to plant an additional 75,000 acres of trees a year by the end of the next Parliament.

Chris Evans: Small things make a big difference when it comes to climate change. Waunfawr primary school in my constituency has an eco community, and it decided to switch from plastic bottles to glass bottles to provide its milk. It had lots of problems finding a dairy that would provide glass bottles, but eventually it did. How will the Department ensure that fewer single use plastics are used by businesses, and by those in local government and the public sector?

Kwasi Kwarteng: I do not know the detail of what is happening in the hon. Gentleman’s constituency, but I would like to hear more about it. We have made strong efforts in this area, and we must trumpet the fact that we are world leaders in combating climate change. As he knows, we will be hosting COP26, and I would be happy to take him offline, as it were, and pursue this conversation further.

Alex Chalk: Decarbonising transport will be crucial if we are to meet our net zero targets, but the cost of electric vehicles remains high. What more can be done to ensure that that cost comes down and is within reach for the majority of people in our country?

Kwasi Kwarteng: Plenty has been done, and I commend my hon. Friend and welcome him back to his seat after a hard fought campaign. He will know that through the Treasury and the £400 million fund, we are extending the provision of charging facilities for electric vehicles—that issue is the single reason that prevents people from buying EVs. Manufacturers are clear about our intentions and our 2040 target for the full roll out of EVs. We are looking to bring that target forward, and the cost curve is coming down.

Barry Gardiner: I am genuinely sorry that the Minister did not attend the International Renewable Energy Agency assembly earlier this month.  Had he done so, he would have learned that solar auctions are now achieving 1.7 cents per kilowatt hour, which is less than £14 per megawatt hour. Is it time to consider making a global green grid alliance an objective of COP26, and seeing whether a feed in tariff from the UK could incentivise the development of an interconnection with Morocco to deliver such low priced electric power in the UK?

Kwasi Kwarteng: Obviously, I am delighted to see the hon. Gentleman back in his place. I was more troubled to see that his leadership campaign was perhaps not launched with the sufficient energy and enthusiasm he shows so often at the Dispatch Box. On building alliances, the Government’s position is that we are always open to building alliances internationally. We are taking leadership with the COP26 conference. On the climate change agenda, we are taking coal off the grid. We are always open to building alliances internationally.

Alexander Stafford: Will my right hon. Friend agree with the residents of Woodsetts and Harthill in Rother Valley that the best way his Department can tackle climate change is to make the moratorium on fracking permanent?

Kwasi Kwarteng: Absolutely. I welcome my hon. Friend to his place—another very successful campaign. On fracking, the moratorium is what it says: we are stopping it. The only way it can be resumed is by compelling evidence, which so far is not forthcoming. So the moratorium stays and fracking, for the time being, is over.

