Nospeaker: Ordered,That:(1) In the case of a ballot for a select committee chair vacancy to which the provisions of Standing Orders Nos. 122B and 122C apply, the following provisions shall apply for the duration of this order:(a) Nomination forms may be submitted electronically.(b) All references to signing and signatures in Standing Order No. 122B shall be taken to include an electronic copy of a handwritten signature, or such other arrangements as the Speaker may specify.(c) The period within which nominations may be received, the date and times at which the ballot shall be held and any other arrangements made under sub paragraph (d) below shall be announced by the Speaker not less than two working days before the time at which nominations may first be received.(d) The ballot shall be held in accordance with the provisions of sub paragraphs 11 (a) and (d) of Standing Order No 122B and such other arrangements as the Speaker shall direct the Clerk of the House to make.(2) This order expires on 30 June 2020.—(Mr Rees Mogg.)

Lindsay Hoyle: Now that the motion has been agreed, I can inform colleagues of the arrangements for the forthcoming election for the Chairs of the Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy Committee and the Standards Committee.Nominations will open on Monday 27 April at 10 am and close on Monday 4 May at 12 noon. Only members of the Labour party may be candidates. Nominations must be submitted by email only to the Public Bill Office. The email must include a statement that the candidate is willing to stand, and a list of 15 Members from the same party as the candidate who are supporting them. Members are responsible for verifying the names of their supporters.An online ballot will be held on 6 May between 10 am and 2 pm. It will be run on behalf of the House by Civica Election Services, and Members will receive an email from it on the morning of 6 May, with a secure link to the ballot. There will be more information about the arrangements in a briefing note that will be published online shortly and in future copies of the Order Paper.

